# 3. First Code in Java

### 1. Opening VS Code and Creating a Project Folder:
- Open Visual Studio Code and create a folder on your desktop to organize your Java project files.

### 2. Creating a Java Source File:
-  Now create Java source file named "Hello.java" using the ".java" file extension, as is customary for Java source files.

### 3. Installing Java Extension (Optional):
- VS Code may recommend installing a Java extension pack for better Java development experience, including code suggestions and more.

### 4. Using JShell for Experimentation:
- Experiment yorself  with the Java Shell (JShell) to quickly execute Java code snippets and see their output interactively by typing `jshell` in terminal / Command Prompt
    
### 5. Printing Output to the Console:
- Type `System.out.print()` method to print text to the console.
- Use double quotes to indicate text values insude the paranthesis.
- For numerical values such as integers and floats no need to be quoted

    ```
   System.out.print(7) // For numbers
   System.out.print("Hello, World!") // For texts

    ```

### 6. Compiling Error Java Code:
- Open Terminal from menu bar in VS Code.
- Compile your "Hello.java" file  contains `System.out.print("Hello, World!")` ***(the same command that you execute inside jshell)*** using the `javac` command but it will encounter an error like below.

    ```
    learner@debian:~/java-course$ javac Hello.java 
    Hello.java:1: error: class, interface, enum, or record expected
    System.out.println(3);
    ^
    1 error

    ```

The Hello.java code didn't compile successfully due to some syntax issues. In next note, you will get to know  why this error encounters and how to write and compile Java code within a Java file properly.
