# 4. How Java Works?

## Previous Compilation Problem

- The problem that we encountered is getting complilation error on  `Hello.java`, a  program to display "Hello World" message on the screen using Java. 
- The same code was previously functional with JShell, but not in Hello.java. 
- Before we rectify the error, we need to understand how the compilation and execution of code works in Java behind the scenes.

## Java Virtual Machine (JVM)

- JVM (Java Virtual Machine) is crucial for running Java applications/programs.
- JVM ensures platform independence; it allows Java applications to run on various operating systems and being a pillar for Java's popular feauture **"WORA - Write once Run Anywhere"**
- JVM is installed on the host machine and provides the runtime environment for Java programs.
> **_NOTE:_**  
- Though JVM makes Java to be platform independent. But JVM itself is platform independent. 
- We need to download and install respective OS's JVM.
-  i.e If you want to run the compiled java code in Linux machine, you need to install linux version of JVM and same applies to Windows or Mac.

## JIT (Just-In-Time Compilation):

- JIT is a part of the JVM's magic.
- It translates bytecode into machine code as your program runs.
- Improves execution speed by avoiding repetitive translation.
- Converts frequently used code into faster machine instructions.
- Makes your Java programs run faster after an initial warm-up period.

## Java Code Execution Flow

**1. Writing Code**: You create Java code, which is like a recipe for the computer to follow.

**2. Compilation**: The code is compiled by a program called a compiler(Javac). It turns your human-readable code into a language the computer can understand.

**3. Bytecode**: The compiler(Java) produces bytecode, which is a set of instructions that the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) can interpret.

**4. JVM Interpretation**: The JVM reads and interprets the bytecode. It acts as a bridge between your code and the computer's hardware.

**5. Execution**: Your program's bytecode is executed by the JVM. It follows the instructions step by step, performing calculations and tasks.

**6. Output**: If your program includes output (like printing text), the JVM displays the results on your screen.

**7. Completion**: Once the program finishes running, the JVM stops, and your code's execution is complete.


## Entry Point: `main` Method

- To compile and execute a Java program, it needs an entry point, which is the `main` method.
- Compiler seeks the main method from a program and executes it first.
- The `main` method has a specific signature: `public static void main(String[] args)`. ***(You will learn more on this later)***

## Class Structure

- Java is object-oriented; everything revolves around classes and objects.
- A class is required to define and structure the code.
- The `class` keyword signifies the start of a class.
- Class should be named as same as source code file. i.e In our case `Hello.java` is source code file, Hence class name should be Hello.java.
- Class name should starts with Capital Letter i.e `class Hello{...}`
> **_Note_**: You will learn more deeply on what is class, object and method on upcoming guide.

## Reason for Compliation Error:

- In previous program, `Hello.java` -  print method doesn't encapsulated inside `class` and `main` method we got compilation error. 
- Because of this Java compiler can't able to find class/main method in Hello.java file to start compiling our code.

## Corrected Hello.java

Now, we get to know that for creating a simple Java Program,we need to have:
- `class`
- Proper `main` method Signature

By applying the above knowledge we have learnt, the proper simple Java program, printing `Hello World` is sampled below.

```
class Hello {
public static void main(String args[]){
    System.out.println("Hello,World!")
}
}


```
> **_Note_**: Each statement in Java Program should end with semi-colon. ie. `System.out.println(9);`

## More on Compilation and Execution 

**1. Compilation:** Use the Java compiler (`javac`) to compile the Java source code into bytecode.

**2. Bytecode Generation:** Compilation generates a `.class` file, which contains the bytecode.

**3. Running the Code(Execution):** Use the `java` command followed by the class name (without the file extension) to run the bytecode.

**4. Result**: The "Hello World" message should be displayed on the screen.

## Java Runtime Environment (JRE)

- JRE (Java Runtime Environment) includes the runtime and libraries necessary to run Java applications.
- JVM is part of the JRE.
- JRE is required for running Java programs on a machine.

## JDK vs. JRE

- JDK (Java Development Kit) is for developers and includes the tools for writing and compiling Java code.
- JRE is for running Java applications and includes only the necessary runtime components.

## Write Once, Run Anywhere
- Java's "write once, run anywhere" concept is achieved through JVM and JRE.
- Developers use JDK to create applications.
- End-users require only JRE to execute the applications.

## Conclusion

- Understanding the underlying processes of Java application execution involves the roles of JVM, compilation, class structure, and the importance of the `main` method.
- By writing and compiling Java code, you can run applications on any machine with the appropriate JRE installed.
